part of my new philosophy lately has
been to bring more positivity to our
coverage I mean certainly we have a
responsibility to acknowledge and
educate about problems but we also want
to highlight the good that's going to be
hard today when we watched Intel's
presentation on their new core Ultra
20000 desktop processors our first
thought was boy do these ever look
familiar and while we were impressed
that AMD was able to achieve similar
performance at significantly less
wattage not many of you were Gamers
don't want want 5% Improvement they want
FPS and they want it now and well kind
of kills me to have to be the one to
tell you this but Arrow lake is more
like arrow through the heart because
you're not even going to get 5% at least
not across the board the good news is
that your power bill is going to go down
but in many cases so will your
performance so strap in for a very bumpy
ride with me as I try to navigate what
on Earth is going on with CPUs in 2024
but first a short layover to visit my
aunt's Segway to our sponsor Ridge their
magsafe wallets are back in stock it's
the ridge wallet you know and love but
this time it attaches to your phone
crazy check it out in the link in the
description and pick one up
today AOL lake is full of changes some
of which are pretty radical I mean for
starters gone is smt or hyperthreading
along with Intel's traditional
monolithic die approach on the desktop
instead we get a tile based architecture
with the fos packaging that we first saw
in meteor Lake and they're laying down
clusters of skymont efficiency or ecor
between our now single-threaded lion
Cove performance or pees we also get
four XE Graphics cores on the igpu tile
that should be a lot stronger than
Intel's previous attempts at integrated
graphics and while it clearly isn't on
the level of amd's 3D vcash chips they
have upped the level two cach per piece
core by 50% from two Megs to 3 Megs wow
there's also been some big changes to
core turbo Behavior more on that now you
thought I was going to say later didn't
you we've got two chips with us today
the core Ultra 5 245k that's a 6p core 8
e core chip that boosts to 5.2 and 4.6
GHz respectively this is Intel's
intended gamer sweet spot at least for
now then we've got the core Ultra 9 285k
that gets 8 p course and double the
ecourse for a total of 24 cores this one
should be the productivity and also just
do anything monster it'll do 5.5 GHz on
the P course and 4.6 on the eour at
least it sort of will because the 285k
has five yes five different boost
frequencies depending on what you're
doing it technically can actually turbo
up to 5.7 GHz but that's only going to
be a couple select cores in lightly
threaded workloads all right thanks
Intel as for the last CPU the one we
don't have today it gets eight peores
but only 12 ecores and a slightly slower
clock speed so far so interesting but
how's it going to play out for the folks
shopping today we wanted to compare
Intel's own last gen amd's ryzen 9000
and for the folks gaming on the top
chips from the last couple of
generations we included amd's most
popular x3d chips a couple of important
points though we decided to roll the
latest Windows 11 24 H2 and our 96 and
9700x chips are tuned to the new 105
watt TDP that AMD unlocked last month
and finally we didn't bother with the
5800 X 3D for productivity that's a
gaming chip so with that in mind let's
talk gaming performance all of our tests
were run at 1080p low to all but
eliminate GPU bottlenecks and put as
much pressure on these CPUs as possible
in City skylines 2 not only do we see a
decent improvement over 14th gen in both
averages and 1% lows but the 285k is
beating everything in 1% low close the
only problem is it's crushing our 245k
as well it turns out in heavily
multi-threaded games this current
generation gaming chip is looking
decidedly last gen it's not all bad news
we found some generational uplift in
Total War Warhammer 3 it's not much and
also the 285k gets kind of stomped on by
the 9700x in both averages and 1% lows
with the 245k trailing right behind and
that's it
that's the positive news for gaming as
we always say look to multiple sources
to paint the most complete picture but
for the rest of our suite the results
are very disappointing shadow of the
Tomb Raider has the 245k in last place
clearly losing to its predecessor the
14600 K with the 285k not doing a whole
lot better our x3d chips crush it in
averages and even the vilified 9,000
Series chips from AMD come out ahead but
AMD is far from Intel's only enemy here
even Intel's own 14700 K is decently
ahead of our new core Ultra 9 in average
FPS fortunately that's not the case in
rocket league but the 285k is still
losing to its predecessor it seems that
this game doesn't care much about 3D
vcash but loves lots of cores and lots
of threads and is the only game we
tested that placed the 950x on top and
it's bad news again for the 245k which
found itself at the bottom of the list
coming up short to the old Core 5 again
both in averages and 1% lows yikes and
in Red Dead Redemption we see another
case where not only is AMD beating Intel
into the ground but 14th gen is Right
alongside getting in some kicks where it
can and f123 doesn't look a whole lot
better this is a massacre ladies and
gentlemen I mean sure at least the 245k
beat last gen in 1% lows but that's it
and you know what else beats last gen
our new community backpack it's got all
the tech Forward Design you love from
our OG backpack but in a smaller tighter
package sign up for a notification at
lm. g/c Commuter or at the link down
below moving on to Counter Strike 2 both
new chips are solidly in the bottom
three with the 285k getting stomped yet
again at least we see an improvement
with the 245k and 1% lows cyberpunk sees
both doing okay for averages but their
abysmal 1% lows leave them buried at the
bottom of the chart not only being
bested by their own previous generation
but also a 2-year-old AMD chip running
in an 8-year-old socket truly this is a
sad day for gaming and therefore the
world or is it we asked Intel to tell us
their top two and bottom two games that
showcased their new power efficiency
gains and we tested them ourselves with
the
285k and while it's clear you're going
to see some huge swings in performance
depending on what you play with these
new Chips it is equally clear that
you're going to see a reduction in power
consumption across the board something
that Intel unlike AMD really needed to
get under control with this generation
we'll touch a bit more on Power and
thermals later but you can see here that
yes in Final Fantasy 14 Dawn tril we're
losing 20% of our performance but we're
also dropping 40% of our power
consumption and Hitman that was a
similar story with a 45% decrease in
power for only a 133% loss in fps and
those are the worst two what about the
best in 6 we've got a 35% power
reduction while gaining almost 9%
performance on the turn timer and in
f123 nearly 40% less power with 12% more
average FPS don't get me wrong Guys
these are truly small slivers of silver
on some very large cumulon nimbus clouds
but they are there this justtin Intel
has informed us that despite claims of
APO or application optimization being
enabled by default on AOL Lake it was in
fact off on the motherboard they sent us
for our review we've rerun the tests and
discovered a small frame rate increase
in CS2 essentially no change whatsoever
in Shadow of the Tomb Raider and a
decrease of about 10% in Red Dead
Redemption 2's 1% lows the rest of our
games only saw a 1 to 2% change which
could be attributed to run variants some
of our productivity scores even went
down slightly with the feature enabled
for the record APO should be enabled by
default on all boards either in time for
launch or shortly thereafter I can't
believe I'm still doing this character
it also appears that Windows 1124 H2 can
have lower performance in games compared
to other windows versions this is the
version our testing used but since 24 H2
is publicly available you may even be
using it right now we're standing by our
results if you want to learn more about
the wide variety of performance you can
expect depending on which versions of
Windows you're running check out
Hardware unbox coverage as they tested
the 285k on multiple windows versions
and power modes showing some pretty big
changes in fps your mileage may vary
we're still not impressed with aake when
it comes to gaming back to you
[Music]
lonus I don't expect almost any gamer to
look at this and think I am very
compelled to buy this product but what I
can hope is that like we saw with AMD
Zen one that maybe this is the start of
a long journey to recovery for Intel
because if they can figure out what's
going on with the games where they're
getting absolutely dumpstered
productivity looks pretty okay in
blender there's a solid decrease in time
taken to render for the 285k against the
14900 K and we get about a 10%
Improvement between the core fives as
well unfortunately for Intel the 950x is
still on top but considering that the
245k Beats both the 9700x and 9600 X I'm
seeing this as a bright spot for Intel a
surprising one given the lack of hyp
threading on this new generation
compiling with gdau sees more
improvements for a lake 2 with our 245k
once again beating the AMD
9700x it may only have six peores but
those ecores are really starting to show
their strength now that we see them do
more heavy lifting in multi-threaded
workloads Intel has really invested in
making these new skymont eor beefy to
the point where they're really more like
underclocked Raptor Cove PE course in
handbreak we see more improvements in
av1 encoding the coral Ultra 9 sees a
22% uplift over last gen with about a
15% uplift for the core Ultra 5 neither
of them can crack the Behemoth that is
the 32 thread 950x but it is nice to see
that the 245k isn't completely useless
trailing just behind the 9700x x264
encoding is a similar story with smaller
gains over previous gen on both chips
but hey now our 245k is beating the
9700x by a hair and we see very similar
results in Prime seeve with our 285k in
second place place and the 245k
admirably beating its 9600 X counterpart
especially interesting in our results is
cinebench the 285k finally lands on top
of a chart in multicore and both a lake
chips comfortably beat their 14th gen
counterparts the lack of pee
multi-threading and the extra ecore
clusters really hurt the accor Ultra 5
but at least in single core it puts on a
respectable show trailing just behind
the 14900 K just like in games though
the story here heavily depends on the
workload and we got just abysmal results
in Puget bench's photoshop with both new
Chips performing worse than last gen and
straggling behind AMD by a wide margin
in Premier Intel is better than AMD but
this was already their fight to lose and
unfortunately they managed it aerol Lake
doesn't even manage to beat their last
gen 14th Gen processor so pic Victory
and seven zip is another disappointing
loss in both compression and de
compression wamp wamp can we maybe find
some more silver how about AI I mean
after all unlike amd's most recent
desktop offerings these new Intel chips
have npus oo neural processing and at
least when it comes to open voo we
really see them shine with our 285k
netting an 82% increase over the 14900 K
CPU score in the same test and since our
245k has the same npu tile it gets
nearly the same score there as well
walloping the 14600 K here we start to
see what all the fuss is about with
Intel's new igpu as well those four XC
cores are putting in work with more than
double the performance of last gen
unfortunately AMD CPUs don't support
open Veno they use Windows ML and in
that race they beat Intel's CPU scores
however in most cases on Intel you won't
be using Windows ml so depending on your
use case these new npus might really
matter to you because I don't know you
can afford a brand new CP
and motherboard but not a GPU I don't
know we'll have to see how developers
use these things what could actually be
a factor for you is power while our 285k
peaked at 250 watts to top the charts
earlier it only averaged 218 which is a
303 wat drop from the 14900 K to be
clear Intel is still clearly juicing
their chips harder than AMD but at least
it's finally coming down and it looks
even better when we compare our 245k to
the 14600 k okay less power higher score
you'll love to see it it's just too bad
that AMD Twisted the knife on their most
recent launch it's also just not that
clear of an improvement we looked at
Intel's best case for performance per
wat in gaming earlier but in our usual
process for power and thermal testing we
use f123 and gen over gen it's more of a
mixed bag here yeah they're using fewer
Watts on both SKS but surprisingly
they're running a few
hotter so it looks like unless they're
using significantly less power you can
expect a pretty similar operating
temperature but hey at least you can
reuse your old cooler with the new LGA
1851 socket oh yeah I only briefly
mentioned this before if you want these
new Chips you're going to need a new
motherboard sick truly guys I don't
remember the last launch that left me
this disappointed I mean there is a ton
of cool stuff here to get excited about
like the potential prediction
Improvement thanks to removing smt and
the new knobs and dials for overclocking
leaks have even popped up showing the
285k reaching over 350 Watts for an
alleged 82% performance gain it's just
too bad that the majority of you guys
watching this video are probably never
going to try your hand at overclocking
Beyond enabling XMP on your RAM anyway
speaking of ram big changes there we're
getting CU dim support and a ddr5 only
memory controller Intel told us that
these CPUs should see some decent game
gains when cranking up the speed to
8,000 megat transfers per second or
greater which sounds pretty cool except
that ours completely refused to do it so
we weren't able to verify their claims
stay tuned though maybe now that both
AMD and Intel have settled on ddr5 we'll
have to test a wide range of memory
speeds on both Platforms in the not too
distant future maybe an update or two in
the meantime will fix Intel's issues in
time for that which leaves us with one
last kick in the teeth when we started
writing this review the ryzen 9 950x was
scarce and prices were high but as of
the weekend before the Embargo lift the
950x went on sale for as low as
$599 that didn't last long and at the
time of filming they're already back to
the $700 range but it's a good way to
get us started on the conversation about
pricing today you can buy a core Ultra 9
285k for
$589 you're also going to need a new
motherboard that supports the new 1851
socket and realistically probably some
new ddr5 memory if you want to try to
get faster speeds out of it the ultra 7
265k probably the chip that actually
matters in this launch and unfortunately
the one we have zero benchmarks for it
costs almost 200 bucks less at 3.94 and
the Ultra 5 245k is 309 considering that
Arrow Lake isn't a drop in replacement
it is really hard to get excited about
this pricing when we look at the
competition especially when we consider
that the ryzen 7 9800 x3d is rumored to
be released next month Intel's calling
AOL Lake a reset on the desktop road map
and I guess I'm just hoping that that's
true and that this is a Zen one moment
like that was a major change with some
real improvements but it wasn't that
competitive the real competitiveness
came later with Zen 2 and especially Zen
3 so for Intel right now unless you're
super keen on an npu on desktop or
you're one of those people who still
thinks that AMD is Kirkland brand Intel
it's really hard for me to find a reason
to buy these if you do want to pick one
up we'll have it and all the CPUs that
we tested Linked In the description down
below as always I'm your host lus
Sebastian and this is a segue to today's
sponsor Squarespace have you ever
checked out our beautiful website we
built it from the ground up with
Squarespace they make building a website
easy with Squarespace blueprint a tool
designed to give you great layouts and
styling options so your site is
optimized for every device and with
their fluid engine editor you can easily
customize those layouts thanks to a
code-free drag and drop approach they
also have integrated and optimized SEO
tools that help your site rank higher in
search results and if you plan on
selling products Squarespace accepts
credit cards PayPal and even Apple pay
to give your customers flexibility start
building your website today and use
offer code LTT for 10% off at
squarespace.com LTT if you guys enjoyed
this video you might want to check out
our review of the 7800 x3d who knows
what the 9800 x3d will have in store for
gamers but boy has this line been a very
exciting one to watch